---
title: How difficult is this course?
---

The difficulty of a course is a subjective assessment. Portions of a
course that might be easy for one student might be difficult for
another and vice versa. However, there are some recognized approaches
to gauging the difficulty of a class. I invite you to take the content
of our course syllabus and estimates for your individual self the
subjective values and plug them into this [course difficulty
estimator](https://cat.wfu.edu/resources/tools/estimator2/) and come
up with your own approximation of how much time you will need to spend
in and out of class on these assignments. In my estimation, this
course is most difficult in the 3rd week, when we first learn how to
construct an interpreter for the lambda calculus. Things ease off
there for a while. The second most difficult "ramp up" is on the 6th
assignment, after the first exam, when we begin to learn and work with
continuations. The first few weeks are a warm up and largely
recapitulate some of what you know from Fundies courses. The
in-between assignments by and large retrench what you have learned at
the tough spots, with some additions and extensions. The 9th
assignment is tough not because you're learning anything new (in fact
I hope you are not) but because it acts sort of as a "synchronization
buffer"---anything you didn't get the first time around, you're now
forced to grapple with. I think that the course gets to an exploratory
phase after that where we can investigate a few topics as one-offs.
