---
title: How do I get 10 points on an assignment?
---

> The [grading flowchart]({{ site.baseurl }}/syllabus/) says that to
>  get 10 points on an assignment, it has to be "better than our
>  answer key." Please elaborate on how we would achieve this. Assuming
>  we accomplish all of the baseline expectatons, what steps could we
>  take to go above and beyond to get a 10?

So. First off, you should know that we consider a 9 and a 10
/literally/ considered the same value. Y'know how you can get an A,
and also an A+, where the latter amounts to an A with a kudos on it?
It's like that.

As to a definition, h'bout "Perfect, and also in a way that makes me
find my own best solutions deficient." That's a pretty good
bright-line for what that's meant. I want to be able to really say
"great job!" really meaningfully when appropriate. 


Some assignments this'd be more difficult than others; I'll be honest
the early ones are in one sense elementary enough that it's tough to
definitively improve them. But as we go forward there'll be some
things where I only have a so-so solution, or it seems like
something's still not *quite* right about how to phrase the question,
or what have you. 

It almost feels like one of those logical paradoxes. If I could tell
you ahead of time how to do better than our answer key, I would use
that knowledge and improve our answer key.

Pedagogy, I wanted to do a 10 point scale and even though we're
computer scientists it feels weird to do that 0-9. So, I put an extra
number on there. Perhaps I should have gone
1[-11](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xgx4k83zzc).